Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
SI units and fundamental physical quantities.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is the International System of Units,
and why does a standardised system of units matter in anaesthesia?
The International System of Units, abbreviated SI from the French Système
International, is the modern, internationally agreed system of measurement,
built upon a small set of defined base units from which all other units are
derived, and it provides a single, coherent and reproducible language of
measurement used throughout science and medicine.
A unit is simply an agreed standard quantity against which a measurement is
expressed, so that a measurement is a number multiplied by a unit.
A standardised system matters in anaesthesia for several reasons.
It ensures that measurements are unambiguous and reproducible between people,
places and times — a pressure or a dose means the same everywhere.
It allows equations relating physical quantities to be consistent and dimensionally
correct.
It underlies the safe prescription of drugs and the correct interpretation of every
monitored variable, from blood pressure to gas concentrations.
And errors in units are a recognised source of clinical harm,
as when a dose or a concentration is misexpressed.
The SI system achieves coherence by deriving all units from the base units through
multiplication and division without arbitrary conversion factors,
so that the system hangs together logically.
So the SI is the internationally agreed,
coherent system of measurement founded on defined base units,
and a standardised system is essential in anaesthesia for unambiguous,
reproducible measurement, for dimensionally consistent equations,
and for the safe prescription and interpretation that underpin patient safety.
What are the SI base units?
The SI is founded on seven base units,
each corresponding to a fundamental physical quantity,
from which every other unit in the system is derived.
The seven base quantities and their units are as follows.
The metre, symbol small m, is the unit of length.
The kilogram, symbol k g, is the unit of mass — and it is the only base unit whose
name retains a prefix. The second, symbol small s, is the unit of time.
The ampere, symbol capital A, is the unit of electric current.
The kelvin, symbol capital K, is the unit of thermodynamic temperature.
The mole, symbol m o l, is the unit of amount of substance.
And the candela, symbol c d, is the unit of luminous intensity,
the least relevant to clinical practice.
Each of these base units now has a precise definition tied to fundamental physical
constants — for instance the second is defined by a property of the caesium atom,
and the metre by the speed of light — which makes them reproducible anywhere
without reference to a physical artefact.
Of the seven, the ones of greatest relevance to anaesthesia are the metre,
kilogram, second, ampere, kelvin and mole.
So the seven SI base units are the metre, kilogram, second, ampere, kelvin,
mole and candela, corresponding to length, mass, time, current, temperature,
amount of substance and luminous intensity,
each precisely defined against fundamental constants — the foundation from which
all derived units are built.
How are derived units formed, and give important examples.
Derived units are formed by combining the base units through multiplication and
division, in accordance with the physical relationships between quantities,
and many are given special names for convenience,
but each can always be expressed in terms of the base units.
The principle is that the unit of any quantity follows from its definition:
since speed is distance divided by time, its unit is metres per second;
since acceleration is the rate of change of speed,
its unit is metres per second squared.
Several derived units have special names that are essential in anaesthesia.
The newton, the unit of force, is the force that accelerates one kilogram at one
metre per second squared, so it equals one kilogram-metre per second squared.
The pascal, the unit of pressure, is one newton per square metre.
The joule, the unit of energy or work,
is one newton-metre — the work done when a force of one newton moves through one
metre. The watt, the unit of power,
is one joule per second — the rate of doing work.
In the electrical domain, the volt, ohm and coulomb are derived units.
The hertz, the unit of frequency, is one cycle per second.
Each of these, though named, reduces to a combination of base units.
So derived units are constructed from the base units according to physical
definitions, with special names such as the newton, pascal, joule, watt,
volt and hertz for force, pressure, energy, power,
electrical quantities and frequency — every one ultimately expressible in base
units, which keeps the system coherent.
Explain the SI prefixes and their use.
The SI prefixes are standard multipliers, each a power of ten,
that are attached to a unit to express quantities that are very large or very small
without resorting to cumbersome numbers,
and their correct use is important for clarity and for avoiding dangerous errors.
Each prefix represents a factor by which the unit is multiplied.
Working upwards from the unit: kilo means one thousand, mega one million,
and giga one thousand million.
Working downwards: milli means one thousandth, micro one millionth,
nano one thousand-millionth, and pico one million-millionth.
Thus a milligram is a thousandth of a gram, a microgram a millionth of a gram,
and a nanogram a thousand-millionth.
These prefixes are used constantly in anaesthesia — drug doses in milligrams and
micrograms, gas pressures in kilopascals,
infusion concentrations in micrograms per millilitre, and so on.
The clinical importance of using them correctly cannot be overstated,
because a thousand-fold error arises if milligrams and micrograms are confused,
and such errors have caused serious harm;
this is why doses are written in full and why the abbreviation for microgram is
often spelt out rather than using the Greek symbol that can be misread.
So the SI prefixes are decimal multipliers — kilo, mega and giga upward; milli,
micro, nano and pico downward — that express large and small quantities concisely,
and their correct and unambiguous use,
particularly distinguishing milligram from microgram,
is a genuine matter of patient safety.
Let us take pressure in detail. Define it and give the units used in clinical
practice.
Pressure is one of the most important physical quantities in anaesthesia,
defined as force applied per unit area,
so that the same force concentrated over a smaller area produces a greater
pressure. Its SI unit is the pascal, equal to one newton per square metre.
The pascal, however, is a very small unit, so the kilopascal is commonly used.
The difficulty in clinical practice is that several non-SI units of pressure remain
in widespread use for historical reasons, and one must be able to relate them.
Atmospheric pressure at sea level is about one hundred and one kilopascals,
which equals about seven hundred and sixty millimetres of mercury,
or about one bar, or one atmosphere.
Blood pressure and gas partial pressures in blood are traditionally expressed in
millimetres of mercury, a unit derived from the height of a mercury column the
pressure will support.
Airway and central venous pressures are often expressed in centimetres of water,
a less dense fluid giving a larger, more convenient column for low pressures.
Cylinder and pipeline pressures are expressed in bar or kilopascals.
Useful approximate conversions are that one kilopascal is about seven and a half
millimetres of mercury, and one centimetre of water is about three-quarters of a
millimetre of mercury.
So pressure is force per unit area, its SI unit the pascal,
but clinical practice uses kilopascals,
millimetres of mercury for blood and gas pressures,
centimetres of water for airway and venous pressures,
and bar for cylinders — and the anaesthetist must be able to convert between them.
Now energy, work and power.
Energy, work and power are related quantities of fundamental importance,
and distinguishing them clearly avoids confusion.
Energy is the capacity to do work, and work is done when a force moves its point of
application through a distance; the two share the same unit, the joule.
One joule is the work done when a force of one newton acts through one metre.
Energy takes many forms — kinetic, potential, electrical, chemical,
thermal — and is interconvertible but conserved overall.
In anaesthesia the joule appears in several contexts:
the energy delivered by a defibrillator is measured in joules;
the energy content of metabolic fuels and of nutrition is measured in joules,
though the older calorie is still often used,
one calorie being about four point two joules;
and the work of breathing is energy expended per breath, measured in joules.
Power is the rate of doing work or of expending energy, its unit the watt,
equal to one joule per second.
Power describes how quickly energy is delivered or used:
the power of breathing is the work of breathing per unit time;
the power consumption of equipment is in watts;
and the rate of energy expenditure of the body, the metabolic rate,
is fundamentally a power, often expressed in watts or in kilocalories per day.
So energy and work share the joule,
energy being the capacity and work the transfer of it through force over distance,
while power is the rate of energy transfer measured in watts — distinctions that
recur in defibrillation, nutrition, the work and power of breathing,
and metabolic rate.
Describe the SI units relevant to electricity.
Electrical quantities have their own set of SI units, several of them derived,
and a working grasp of them underlies electrical safety,
monitoring and the function of much equipment.
The base electrical unit is the ampere, the unit of electric current,
which is the rate of flow of electric charge.
Charge itself is measured in coulombs,
one coulomb being the charge transported by one ampere in one second.
The potential difference, or voltage, that drives current is measured in volts;
one volt is the potential difference that, driving one ampere through a resistance,
dissipates one watt of power.
Resistance, the opposition to current flow, is measured in ohms; by Ohm's law,
the voltage across a resistor equals the current through it multiplied by its
resistance, so one ohm is one volt per ampere.
Electrical power, the rate of energy dissipation,
is measured in watts and equals voltage multiplied by current.
Other quantities include capacitance, measured in farads,
the ability to store charge, and the related quantities of inductance and
impedance, the latter being the effective opposition to alternating current.
These units matter in anaesthesia for understanding electrical safety — the
currents that cause harm, the principles of isolation and earthing — and the
operation of monitors, diathermy and defibrillators.
So the electrical SI units are the ampere for current, the coulomb for charge,
the volt for potential difference, the ohm for resistance,
the watt for power and the farad for capacitance,
linked by Ohm's law and by the power relationship,
and they underpin electrical safety and the function of electromedical equipment.
Explain the mole and the expression of amounts and concentrations.
The mole is the SI base unit for the amount of substance,
and it is central to chemistry, to the expression of concentrations,
and to understanding gas and solute behaviour.
The mole is defined as the amount of a substance containing a fixed,
very large number of elementary entities — Avogadro's number,
about six times ten to the twenty-third — so that one mole of any substance
contains the same number of molecules or atoms.
The mass of one mole of a substance in grams equals its molecular weight.
The value of the mole is that it counts particles rather than mass,
which matters because physical and chemical effects often depend on the number of
particles present rather than their mass: osmotic pressure, for example,
depends on the molar concentration of dissolved particles.
Concentrations are accordingly often expressed in moles per litre,
or millimoles per litre, as for the plasma electrolytes — sodium,
potassium and so on — which are reported in millimoles per litre.
Some substances are still expressed by mass concentration,
such as grams per litre for haemoglobin or milligrams per millilitre for drug
solutions, and some by other conventions. The osmole, derived from the mole,
expresses the number of osmotically active particles.
So the mole is the unit of amount of substance,
counting a fixed number of particles,
with the molar mass in grams equal to the molecular weight,
and it underlies the expression of concentrations in moles or millimoles per litre
— important because many biological effects depend on the number of particles
rather than their mass.
Distinguish temperature scales — kelvin and Celsius.
Temperature is measured on two scales relevant to medicine — the kelvin,
which is the SI base unit, and the Celsius scale,
in everyday clinical use — and understanding their relationship is important for
the gas laws and for clinical measurement.
The kelvin is the SI unit of thermodynamic temperature,
and the kelvin scale is an absolute scale: its zero, absolute zero,
is the theoretical point of no thermal energy, the lowest possible temperature,
at minus two hundred and seventy-three point one five degrees Celsius.
A change of one kelvin is exactly equal in size to a change of one degree Celsius,
so the two scales differ only in the position of their zero,
not in the size of their degree.
To convert, one adds about two hundred and seventy-three to a Celsius temperature
to obtain the temperature in kelvin.
The Celsius scale, by contrast, sets its zero at the freezing point of water and
one hundred at its boiling point, which is convenient for everyday and clinical
use, so body temperature is expressed in degrees Celsius around thirty-seven.
The crucial point is that for any physical calculation involving temperature —
particularly the gas laws, which relate the behaviour of gases to absolute
temperature — the absolute kelvin scale must be used,
because the laws hold only when temperature is measured from absolute zero.
So the kelvin is the absolute SI temperature scale measured from absolute zero,
the Celsius scale shares the same degree size but is offset to water's freezing
point for clinical convenience, and absolute temperature in kelvin must be used in
physical calculations such as the gas laws.
What is meant by the dimensions of a physical quantity,
and how is dimensional analysis useful?
The dimensions of a physical quantity describe its fundamental nature in terms of
the base quantities — such as mass,
length and time — independently of the particular units used,
and dimensional analysis, the checking of equations for dimensional consistency,
is a powerful tool for detecting errors and understanding relationships.
Every physical quantity can be expressed in terms of the base dimensions:
for example, velocity has dimensions of length divided by time; force,
by Newton's second law as mass times acceleration,
has dimensions of mass times length divided by time squared; and pressure,
force per area, has dimensions of mass divided by length and time squared.
The fundamental principle of dimensional analysis is that any valid physical
equation must be dimensionally homogeneous — the dimensions on both sides must be
identical, and only quantities of the same dimensions may be added or equated.
This provides a check: if an equation is not dimensionally consistent,
it must be wrong, which is a quick way to catch errors.
It also allows the form of a relationship to be deduced,
predicting how quantities must combine,
and it confirms that conversion between units is being done correctly.
So the dimensions of a quantity express its nature in terms of base quantities such
as mass, length and time, and dimensional analysis — requiring that valid equations
be dimensionally homogeneous — is a valuable means of checking equations,
deducing relationships and verifying unit conversions.
Differentiate accuracy, precision and the related ideas of error in measurement.
Accuracy and precision are distinct properties of a measurement, often confused,
and understanding the difference, together with the types of error,
is essential to interpreting any measured quantity or assessing any measuring
device.
Accuracy is the closeness of a measurement to the true value — an accurate
instrument gives readings centred on the correct value.
Precision, also called repeatability or reproducibility,
is the closeness of repeated measurements to one another — a precise instrument
gives consistent readings, with little scatter, whether or not they are correct.
The two are independent: a device may be precise but inaccurate,
giving consistent but systematically wrong readings,
or accurate on average but imprecise, scattering around the true value.
The classic analogy is the target: precise shots cluster tightly,
accurate shots centre on the bull, and ideally both.
Errors are correspondingly of two kinds.
Systematic errors, or bias, shift readings consistently in one direction — from
miscalibration, drift or a constant offset — and reduce accuracy;
they can in principle be corrected by calibration.
Random errors cause scatter in both directions,
from noise and unpredictable variation, and reduce precision;
they are reduced by averaging repeated measurements.
Calibration against a known standard corrects systematic error and is essential to
maintaining accuracy.
So accuracy is closeness to the true value and precision is consistency of repeated
readings; systematic errors reduce accuracy and are correctable by calibration,
while random errors reduce precision and are reduced by averaging — distinctions
fundamental to evaluating measurement.
Distinguish scalar and vector quantities.
Physical quantities are of two kinds — scalars and vectors — and the distinction
matters whenever direction is relevant, as it often is in the physics of flow,
force and cardiac electrical activity.
A scalar quantity has magnitude only; it is fully described by a number and a unit.
Examples include mass, temperature, time, energy, volume,
speed and pressure — to state that something has a mass of seventy kilograms or a
temperature of thirty-seven degrees needs no direction.
A vector quantity, by contrast, has both magnitude and direction,
and both must be specified to describe it fully;
it is often represented by an arrow whose length gives the magnitude and whose
orientation gives the direction.
Examples include force, velocity, acceleration and momentum — a velocity is a speed
in a stated direction, and a force acts in a particular direction.
The distinction has practical consequences:
vectors must be combined by vector addition, taking direction into account,
so that two forces or velocities do not simply add arithmetically unless they act
in the same line.
In anaesthesia, vector concepts appear in the analysis of the cardiac electrical
axis, where the net direction of cardiac depolarisation is a vector deduced from
the electrocardiogram, and in the mechanics of forces and flows.
So scalars have magnitude alone, such as mass, temperature and pressure,
while vectors have both magnitude and direction, such as force and velocity,
and must be combined by vector addition — a distinction relevant to forces,
flows and the cardiac electrical axis.
Define density and specific gravity, and note their relevance.
Density and specific gravity are related measures of how much matter is packed into
a given volume, and they are relevant to fluid behaviour, to the flow of gases,
and to several clinical measurements.
Density is defined as mass per unit volume,
its SI unit the kilogram per cubic metre,
though grams per millilitre is often used;
it describes how heavy a substance is for its size, so that mercury is very dense,
water has a density of about one gram per millilitre, and gases are far less dense.
Specific gravity, also called relative density,
is the ratio of the density of a substance to the density of a reference substance
— water for liquids and solids, air for gases — and being a ratio it is
dimensionless.
The specific gravity of urine, for example,
is measured to assess its concentration,
and that of cerebrospinal fluid relative to it matters in spinal anaesthesia.
Indeed, the behaviour of spinal anaesthetic solutions is described in these terms:
a hyperbaric solution is denser than cerebrospinal fluid and sinks,
an isobaric solution has the same density and tends to stay,
and a hypobaric solution is less dense and rises,
which determines the spread of the block with patient position.
Density also influences gas flow, denser gases being more prone to turbulent flow.
So density is mass per unit volume and specific gravity is the dimensionless ratio
of a substance's density to that of a reference,
and they are relevant to urine concentration,
to the baricity that governs the spread of spinal anaesthetics,
and to the flow behaviour of gases.
What is frequency, and where does it feature in measurement?
Frequency is the number of cycles of a repeating event occurring per unit time,
its SI unit the hertz, equal to one cycle per second,
and it is a quantity that features throughout physiological measurement and medical
equipment.
Any periodic phenomenon has a frequency:
a heart rate of sixty beats per minute is a frequency of one hertz;
the mains electrical supply alternates at fifty or sixty hertz; and sound,
ultrasound and electromagnetic radiation are all characterised by their frequency.
The reciprocal of frequency is the period, the time for one cycle.
Frequency is fundamental to several areas of anaesthetic measurement.
In sound and ultrasound, frequency determines pitch and, in ultrasound imaging,
the resolution and penetration — higher frequencies giving better resolution but
less penetration, which governs probe selection.
In the analysis of physiological signals such as the arterial pressure waveform,
the concept of frequency is central:
a complex waveform can be regarded as the sum of sine waves of different
frequencies, and a measurement system must be able to respond faithfully across the
relevant range of frequencies — its frequency response and natural resonant
frequency determining whether it reproduces the waveform accurately or distorts it.
The electrical interference that contaminates monitoring often occurs at the mains
frequency, which filters target.
So frequency is the number of cycles per second, measured in hertz,
and it is central to heart rate, the mains supply, sound and ultrasound,
and the frequency response of measurement systems that determines whether they
faithfully reproduce physiological waveforms.
Why are some non-SI units retained in clinical practice,
and what are the implications?
Despite the coherence of the SI system,
a number of non-SI units persist in clinical practice for historical and practical
reasons, and their continued use has both conveniences and hazards that the
anaesthetist must navigate.
Several units predate or sit outside the strict SI framework but remain entrenched
because they are familiar, convenient, or tied to established instruments.
Blood pressure and gas partial pressures are routinely expressed in millimetres of
mercury rather than kilopascals, because the mercury manometer was the historical
instrument and the numbers are familiar;
airway pressures in centimetres of water for the same reasons.
The litre, though not a base SI unit,
is universally used for volume in place of the cubic metre because it is a
convenient size. Time is expressed in minutes and hours rather than seconds.
Drug doses sometimes use older conventions,
and the calorie persists alongside the joule for energy.
The implications are twofold. On the one hand,
these units are practical and deeply embedded,
so abolishing them is neither feasible nor necessarily desirable.
On the other hand, the coexistence of multiple units for the same quantity is a
source of error and confusion, requiring fluency in conversion and vigilance,
particularly where a misconversion could harm a patient.
So non-SI units such as the millimetre of mercury, centimetre of water, litre,
minute and calorie are retained for historical familiarity and practical
convenience, and while entrenched and useful,
their coexistence with SI units demands fluency in conversion and care to avoid
error.
Give examples of how units and quantities are applied in everyday anaesthetic
practice.
It is worth drawing the abstract discussion of units into the concrete measurements
of daily anaesthetic practice, because the system of units is not an academic
matter but the framework within which every clinical variable is expressed and
interpreted.
Consider a routine anaesthetic. The patient's weight is in kilograms,
the basis of weight-based drug dosing. Drugs are drawn up and given in milligrams
and micrograms, with infusions in micrograms per kilogram per minute or millilitres
per hour.
Gas flows on the anaesthetic machine are set in litres per minute,
and the inspired oxygen as a fractional concentration or percentage.
Volatile agent concentration is expressed as a percentage and related to the
minimum alveolar concentration.
Airway pressures are read in centimetres of water, tidal volumes in millilitres,
and respiratory rate as a frequency per minute.
The blood pressure is in millimetres of mercury, the heart rate in beats per minute.
Arterial blood gas results give partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in
kilopascals or millimetres of mercury, the pH as a number,
and electrolytes in millimoles per litre. Temperature is in degrees Celsius.
Cylinder contents are in bar. A defibrillator delivers joules.
Every one of these is a number and a unit,
and competent practice requires fluency in all of them and in the conversions
between the alternative units in use.
So everyday anaesthesia is conducted entirely in units — kilograms,
milligrams and micrograms, litres per minute, centimetres of water,
millimetres of mercury, kilopascals, millimoles per litre, degrees Celsius,
bar and joules — and fluency in this language of measurement is fundamental to safe
practice.
What are the common pitfalls and sources of error relating to units in clinical
practice?
Errors involving units are a recognised and preventable cause of clinical harm,
and recognising the common pitfalls is an important part of safe practice.
The most dangerous is the confusion of prefixes,
particularly milligram with microgram — a thousand-fold error — which has caused
fatal overdoses; this is mitigated by writing doses and units in full,
avoiding ambiguous abbreviations and the easily misread Greek symbol for micro,
and by independent checking of high-risk drugs.
A related error is the misplacement of the decimal point, a ten-fold error,
mitigated by writing a leading zero before a decimal point and avoiding trailing
zeros.
Confusion between units of the same quantity is another source of error — treating
millimetres of mercury as kilopascals, or misconverting between them.
Errors arise from unit-less numbers,
where a value is recorded or communicated without its unit, leaving it ambiguous.
Concentration errors are common, particularly confusing the total dose with the
concentration, or percentage solutions,
where a one per cent solution contains ten milligrams per millilitre — a
relationship frequently miscalculated.
Errors in weight-based dosing arise if the wrong weight is used.
The defences are systematic: standardised prescribing conventions, clear labelling,
the use of full words rather than ambiguous symbols,
double-checking of high-risk calculations,
and familiarity with the standard concentrations and conversions.
So the common unit-related pitfalls are prefix confusion, decimal-point errors,
confusion between units of the same quantity, omission of units,
and concentration miscalculations — all preventable by careful prescribing
conventions, clear labelling, unambiguous notation and independent checking.
Briefly, what are fundamental physical constants, and do any matter clinically?
Fundamental physical constants are fixed quantities of nature that appear in
physical laws and that, in the modern SI,
are used to define the base units themselves,
and although mostly the concern of metrology, a few have clinical relevance.
A physical constant is a quantity whose value is the same everywhere and does not
change — examples include the speed of light, the gravitational constant,
the charge on the electron, Planck's constant, and Avogadro's number.
In the redefined SI, the base units are now anchored to such constants rather than
to physical artefacts: the second to a property of the caesium atom,
the metre to the speed of light, and the kilogram to Planck's constant,
which makes the units reproducible anywhere without a reference object.
Of direct clinical relevance, Avogadro's number underlies the mole and hence the
expression of concentrations and the behaviour of gases and solutes.
The universal gas constant, which appears in the ideal gas equation relating the
pressure, volume, amount and temperature of a gas,
is fundamental to understanding gas behaviour,
cylinder contents and the gas laws we apply daily.
The acceleration due to gravity underlies pressure measurement by liquid columns,
since the pressure of a column depends on its height, the fluid density and gravity.
So fundamental constants are fixed values of nature now used to define the SI base
units, and while chiefly a matter of metrology, Avogadro's number,
the gas constant and the acceleration due to gravity have practical relevance to
concentrations, the gas laws and pressure measurement.
Finally, draw together the relevance of units and physical quantities to
anaesthetic practice.
Drawing the station together, the system of units and physical quantities is the
framework within which the whole of measurement in anaesthesia is conducted,
and although it appears elementary,
a secure command of it underpins both physical understanding and patient safety.
The SI system provides a coherent, reproducible foundation of seven base units —
the metre, kilogram, second, ampere, kelvin,
mole and candela — from which all derived units, such as the newton, pascal, joule,
watt, volt and hertz, are logically built, with decimal prefixes for scale.
From this framework flow the practical themes of our practice.
Pressure, force per unit area, is measured in pascals but expressed clinically in
kilopascals, millimetres of mercury, centimetres of water and bar,
demanding fluency in conversion.
Energy and power, the joule and watt, recur in defibrillation,
nutrition and the work of breathing. The electrical units underpin safety and
equipment. The mole underlies concentrations and gas behaviour,
and the absolute kelvin scale the gas laws.
Accuracy and precision, and the systematic and random errors that degrade them,
govern the interpretation of every measurement and the assessment of every device.
And the correct, unambiguous use of units — above all the distinction of milligram
from microgram — is a genuine matter of patient safety.
So units and physical quantities are not a dry preliminary but the language of all
measurement and prescription in anaesthesia,
and fluency in that language is foundational to safe and competent practice.
Beyond accuracy and precision, what other characteristics describe a measurement
system?
A measuring instrument is described not only by its accuracy and precision but by a
set of further characteristics that determine how faithfully it represents the
quantity being measured, and these are important when selecting and interpreting
any clinical device.
The range is the span of values, from minimum to maximum,
that the instrument can measure; a reading near the extremes of the range,
or beyond it, is unreliable.
Linearity is the degree to which the output is directly proportional to the input
across the range — a linear device has a constant relationship,
so that a given change in the measured quantity produces the same change in output
everywhere, which simplifies calibration and interpretation;
non-linear devices need correction.
Drift is a slow change in the output over time when the measured quantity is
unchanged, usually from temperature change or ageing of components,
which degrades accuracy and necessitates periodic recalibration and zeroing.
Hysteresis is the property whereby the reading for a given value differs depending
on whether that value is being approached from above or below — the instrument
lagging behind changes — which introduces error in fluctuating measurements.
The response time, or the related frequency response,
describes how quickly the instrument follows a change in the measured quantity,
crucial for measuring rapidly changing signals such as a pressure waveform.
Sensitivity is the smallest change the device can detect.
So a measurement system is characterised by its range, its linearity, its drift,
its hysteresis, its response time and frequency response, and its sensitivity,
all of which, beyond accuracy and precision,
determine how faithfully it represents the measured quantity and must be considered
when choosing and trusting a device.
Explain calibration and why it is essential.
Calibration is the process of checking and adjusting a measuring instrument against
a known reference standard so that its readings are accurate,
and it is essential to the trustworthiness of every clinical measurement.
The principle is to expose the instrument to one or more known values of the
quantity it measures — values established by a reliable standard — and to adjust
the instrument so that its output matches them,
thereby correcting systematic error and confirming accuracy across the range.
Calibration takes several forms.
A single-point calibration sets the instrument correct at one value,
commonly the zero, which is why zeroing — setting the output to read zero when the
true value is zero, as when an arterial transducer is opened to atmosphere — is a
routine and important step.
A two-point calibration uses two known values,
typically the zero and a known full-scale value, the span,
to correct both the offset and the gain, which suffices for a linear instrument.
A multi-point calibration uses several values across the range,
needed for non-linear devices. Calibration must be repeated periodically because of
drift, and after maintenance or movement.
The reference standards used must themselves be traceable to recognised national or
international standards, forming a chain of traceability that underpins the
validity of measurement. Without calibration,
systematic errors go undetected and readings cannot be trusted.
So calibration is the adjustment of an instrument against known reference standards
— by zeroing, by two-point setting of zero and span,
or by multi-point correction — repeated periodically to counter drift and traceable
to recognised standards, and it is essential because it corrects systematic error
and is what allows a measurement to be trusted.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The SI system is a coherent,
reproducible framework of seven base units (metre, kilogram, second, ampere,
kelvin, mole, candela) from which all derived units (newton, pascal, joule, watt,
volt, hertz) are logically built, with decimal prefixes for scale.
Second, Pressure is force per unit area (SI unit the pascal),
but clinical practice uses kilopascals, mmHg (blood and gas pressures),
cmH2O (airway and venous pressures) and bar (cylinders) - so fluency in conversion
is essential (1 kPa is about 7.5 mmHg).
Third, Accuracy is closeness to the true value;
precision is consistency of repeated readings - systematic errors (bias) reduce
accuracy and are corrected by calibration,
while random errors reduce precision and are reduced by averaging.
Fourth, Absolute temperature in kelvin (measured from absolute zero,
minus 273 degrees Celsius) must be used in physical calculations such as the gas
laws; the mole counts particles and underlies concentrations because many
biological effects depend on particle number, not mass.
Fifth, Correct, unambiguous use of units is a patient-safety issue:
prefix confusion (milligram versus microgram is a thousand-fold error),
decimal-point errors and concentration miscalculations cause harm,
prevented by clear notation, full words,
standard conventions and independent checking.
Thank you. That concludes the station.